Hello and welcome to the Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbiville. Last week you met
first Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey of Bryant, a 20-year Army veteran with a remarkable story
to tell. Not just of his service in Germany, Korea, Alaska, two tours of Vietnam, and
three weeks in Southside Chicago that he will never forget. Today he'll talk about that
and his second hitch in Vietnam, where he returned home with a second purple heart and
a silver star, the third highest award given by the military. So please welcome back
to Veterans of the Valley, first Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey of Bryant. Jeffrey, it's great
to be back. A remarkable story that you told us last week of your tours in Germany and
Alaska and going to Vietnam for the first time. Let's move on after your first tour
of Vietnam. You said that you came back to Fort Hood and as a chief tactical instructor,
April 4, 1968, Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated and talk about how that caused
what you did next and what your next deployment was going to Chicago. How did that all
come about? Okay, first of all I'm glad to be back. Coming out of Vietnam I was assigned
as a chief tactical instructor at the Third Corps NCO Academy. And kind of turning that
down, I chose to go back with the land unit infantry. So I wound up back up there with
a lifelong friend of mine, which is the cease now, first Sergeant Swarthard and others.
And they had just activated this unit and made up primarily of people who could not
would not didn't want to go to Vietnam, want them light infantry units. So we had the
worst or the worst. And the mission, we were just as soon as we began to get personnel
in the primary mission, in addition to being combat ready, became a right control training.
And my company, my battalion was the primary right control organization on post and other
supporting units. And we trained up and got ready to go whenever called out. Our primary
target was New Orleans, followed by Houston. And so for as I could tell those two cities
missed the revolution. That was never any call for troops in either one of those cities.
But after the death of Martin Luther King, we got alerted on the second day or so that
after he was assassinated and we did get the call, but we didn't go to New Orleans.
In fact, we didn't know where the target was. We knew where it should be. You know, it's
a guessing game. New Orleans, Houston, nothing going on either direction. But we were
wound up going to Chicago. This was a notch after we got down the burst from our force base.
And we went and we did the job that we were sent to do.
You flew and I think you said you flew in a 747 passenger.
747. Right. In a passenger jet. That's right. The Army either commended it or leashed or
had on standby. X number 747 schedule moved troops around the country. And we first class
on the 747. If you consider combat loaded, every man has got his basic load of ammunition.
And it wasn't a pleasure, Cruz. You were combat ready. You had your basic load of ammunition,
it's steel pots, flag jackets. You went for, it was a combat situation. So for us, we
were concerned. You've been to Vietnam. You've faced an enemy there. But this, when you're
on that airplane, you're, I guess you're a little bit anticipating what kind of resistance
you're going to be facing in this sort of a situation on an American street in Chicago.
Well, you, I don't know if you have time to do that. It never occurred to me to think of it
in those terms because number one, you, you know what your mission is. It's to control
people. Right. With a minimum amount of force,
incasuatures and stuff like that. But you are armed to the teeth. You've got your M60 machine
guns, your 50 calories. You got everything you need to do this job. And if you're mission oriented
and you have sworn allegiance to those above you, starting with the president of United States,
you're going to carry out the mission. Right. And you don't get a lot of time to pick and choose
your battles or think about whether or not you agree with the decision. The decision, once the
decision is made, the mission becomes mine to execute. And that's all I need to do. Talk
about the mission. What, what did you find when you got to South Side Chicago? Well, okay fine.
But just prior to departing for hood, getting up at four o'clock in the morning,
mustering and drawing your weapon out of armed room, getting your basic load or ammunition on
palli-tied ready to go. I had one man that came to me and said, first, I don't want to go to Chicago.
And I looked at him because I knew exactly where he's coming from. I just said,
now, is it that you don't want to go or you tell him you don't want to go or you're not going?
He said, oh no, no, no, no, I'm saying I don't want to go. If you're telling me to go, I'm going
to do the job I'm assigned. I said, fine. Go over there and report the first starting
swarfer. That's my friend who had the red detachment going to stay at Ford Hood. We got down to Chicago
we flew out of Burstermouth, Ford's base in Austin on the 747s we were talking about.
As we came into Chicago, came into O'Harefield, I remember the city of Paula,
Smokehand over the city at about 3,000 feet. It looks like the whole city is burning down.
We did plane and within an hour we were in Grant Park out on the shores of Lake Michigan.
There was no rats out there. Absolutely none. We set up Bivwak in the park that night and moved
out at 9 o'clock the next morning, downtown Chicago, Southside and that's where the rats were going on.
And that's where our action took place. We got organized within 30 minutes after we got to
within an hour after we moved into, because we moved from Grant Park 9 o'clock the next morning by bus
with escorts you wouldn't believe. Every police officer with a car, MPs with jeeps.
I don't know who they belonged to, but they were there. Shares people, FBI, just about everybody
you could see escorted us downtown to Jackson Park. Which was also my first experience with
organized gangs per se. We talked about the crypts and the bloods with something several years ago
was a problem. They should be introduced to the Blackstone Rangers, the Grand Daddy of some of the
gangs. We de-plained the bus in Jackson Park, formed up in formation and that's the first conflict
right there because hecklers come along and they start harassing the troops, girls and miniskirts
and guys you know. But once you call out one squad, fix bayonets, they break that one up in a hurry
and that was all over. That got their attention. Right. By four o'clock that afternoon we were on the streets
though. Right. And we locked it down. We was on the streets for 32 hours at 100%. We learned a lot of
things. Number one, you can stand. I had a 50 caliber mounted on the top of the building and you can
stand on the top of the building and you can see three quarters of a mile in any direction up and
down the street. You can always tell whether fight or the right is fish to break out because it's
like watching a stream of water. There go two individuals, a third one's on them, four, five, six
and pretty soon it looks like a moving, flowing stream. And all you got to do is cut off that stream
and you disrupt the right. If you give it time, if it's at night and you can't see them that well,
you listen for the breaking glass. When you hear the glass breaking, you know where all the liquor stores
is because that's the first thing you break into. Right. Get the liquor, then we'll get the
drag goods and burn the place down just for the hell of it. Right. Right. But it was a unique experience.
What were your personal thoughts during this time? Dr. King had been assassinated two days before.
What were your personal thoughts? Is a black soldier who embraced Dr. King's
belief of peace? What were your own thoughts and the mission that you were asked to perform?
Okay. You don't with me. You have a lot of time prior to this. By now I probably
been in the Army 15 years. So I've been in this game for a while. I've had time to evaluate all of the
situations, the relationship between races and so forth. So I'm pretty well set at where I'm at.
And you got to realize that growing up in Brothers County, Texas was my idea of a Uper torn race
thing. It wanted to reason why I stayed in the Army was because the, when I was drafted,
first of all, within the Gleck, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that,
in volunteer, I was drafted. But after being in the Army, a, a year, I realized that the playing
field was on the level. But it was certainly so much more level than it was here. And I stayed in.
Because I'm not only could render service to my country, but I could also advance within the
limits of my own ability to a certain extent. So going into there, we had already been through
the dogs in Alabama with less the Maddox in this pickaxes and bull corners with his dogs.
So you already know what's right and wrong. But you've also been through the rhetoric of the Black
Panthers and other violent perpetuating groups. And that wasn't the answer. So when you get into a
right situation, you accomplish nothing but destruction. You need to talk. And I am duty-bound
to enforce whatever orders are issued. So that's where I stood. That's why I could let that boy
leave that guy back at Fort Hood. And on the second morning when we went to Grand Park,
the Colonel Cork Comet came, he said, first starting, how many people you're bringing with you?
I told him. He says, you're missing one, aren't you? I said, yes, he said, where is yet?
I said, I left him back. He said, why? I told him. You know what he said? He said, that's fine.
You did the right thing. But that was the way the unit was trained. And we were probably 40%
Black. And they got more anxious to do their job when they found out the ratters were really
burning down and killing their own people. They were not, they might have gotten more
support if they had been out in Grand Park burning down that area of time, but they weren't.
I want to go to a few photos right now that they'll sort of go along with the story that we've
told one photo here, the first one if we look at it. We saw this photo last week. People didn't
see the show last week. That was you after your first tour of Vietnam. And I guess just prior to
this deployment to Chicago, this is about 1967 or so, I believe you told me. That would be right.
Right. Okay. This is a photo from an, obviously, an aerial photo of this sort of is in line of
sort of how you described what things looked like when you flew into Chicago with the, with the
smoke rising from the streets. If we could, I'd like to stop the photos right now and we're going
to visit a little bit about Vietnam and then we'll come back with a couple of more photos here
in just a second. Before we leave the Chicago service, I wanted to read what one of the person
wrote who was actually a witness to the days following the assassination said by Saturday, April
6th. This has been two days after the assassination. 6,000 National Guard troops had arrived in Chicago
to suppress the riots and to protect firefighters in the field. The following day, 5,000 US Army
troops arrived to further curtail the rioters and by Monday, the riots had dissipated and the
fires were extinguished. So you all, all together, you all pretty much stopped the riots over the weekend.
In the end, only one firefighter was wounded by gunfire. 12 civilians were killed. 170 buildings
were destroyed, resulting in millions of dollars of damage. So the idea to protect lives for the
most part, although tragically 12 civilians were killed, y'all did your job. We tried to. Exactly.
There's one thing I'd like to point out about the picture. I had been in Chicago, my father-in-law
lived in Chicago, Southside Chicago. So I had been in Chicago a couple of times prior to the riots.
Didn't know the city or anything, but when you are sites in or traveling as a visitor,
you can only see whatever is in your field of vision. Consequently, you can't see the
next street over. And when we came in with the rats, you can't see the buildings just burning on
the next block. You can see those right here. Now when I go back into Chicago years later, like I
was up there three or four years ago, we've been back two or three times since then. The
you have a different perspective of it because now you can see the vacant spots that used to be
mass solid, one block tenets housing. You can see through the vacant space to the next three
streets. You know what the reason is, you know the cause. But you couldn't see that before,
and you couldn't see it during, but you can see it now. The topography of the area has changed,
because these lots still vacant. They haven't rebuilt. I had a boy that was
walking the guard up and down his mother's house in front of his mother's house. I had one
that the black stone ranger told him he could not come back to Chicago ever because they were going
didn't worry about it. I didn't take the boy off the streets, put him on that 50 on the roof,
but to protect him, but we did what we needed to do. Right. And he was protecting his mom's house.
That's right. Bless his heart.
A second tour of Vietnam, Company E, First Battalion, 12th Cav.
Talk about your second tour. How it was different a little bit from the first tour. I know
you talked to me about a difference in how you engaged the enemy, how the enemy engaged you
learning to travel, learn from the enemy, and start traveling in small groups. Talk about the
nature of your second tour of Vietnam. Well, the second tour was different primarily in approach.
With the Vietnamese, it was a kind of a less live and less live. We don't really hunt down the enemy
if they attack you, then you defend yourself. But we were not out there with the 10th Arab
Indivision. It was not a let's go out and find him in destroy. But when you came to the care,
you had to get re-orinated because now your job here now is to search and destroy. It is to find
fix an annihilate or neutralize. You are in an attack mode with the American Army. Right.
In Baghdad, or in Afghanistan, those guys are not just out there keeping the peace. They're looking
for action. That's the nature of the beast. And with the care of you're going to get it
because that's their mission. And I found it to be vastly different about what I had been trained
to expect my end-time military career. And you got more than you needed. And it's like always
in order to accomplish the mission, you sometimes have to go outside of the box. As a result,
we devised and had certain little units that did special things. I had a hundred kill a team as
an example. That was not a part of the table of organization and equipment to T-O-N-E.
We just organized it. We had snipers. I had a section of snipers. That wasn't organized
according to T-O-N-E. But the commanders found them to be useful because you can take a sniper
and put him with every company or platoon. Special operations, special mission. By this time,
though, the entire mission in Vietnam had changed. We were into a hold in pattern or a small unit
type field operation. We changed commanders where Smolong was gone. And it was a small unit type
operation. We also, there was another incident in that second tour that I failed to mention.
One of the first units out of our battalion during the Cambodian invasion was guess who?
That hundred kill a team of men in need. We had, we was taking in a 105 artillery piece,
going to sit it on the ground with the crew on one helicopter, a bulldozer,
slung under the second helicopter with the tracks and blade off on the third helicopter.
And we go in a small force and being eight of us at this time, not counting the artillery crew
and the engineer squad, the security area and right behind us. It's practically the same time
landing is supposed to be an infantry company. Well, guess what? The artillery crew and the engineer
crew, which was on the second craft of the engineers, they didn't land because the first
that black hawk of ours landed, my crew is off. The artillery is slung beneath the belly of us.
C-13, not C-13, a helicopter, transport cargo helicopter.
And the ammunition is slung below that, the gun and then the ammunition.
They cut the ammunition or lose. Now they should move up 50 feet, drop the gun. They don't take
the crew chief, cut that gun or lose right there. It landed on top of the ammunition, flipped over.
Now the artillery crew refused to get off the aircraft, of course. They can't lift it back by
themselves. Engineers can't land and then because the space just for about one cargo helicopter per,
short story is we wound up there on the ground, me and my people that night with orders to secure
that helicopter ammunition and we're in Cambodia, which was, it depends on your outlook.
Right. It's been compared to be shooting fish on a barrel. The animated warrant expecting you,
they didn't know you were coming, they didn't even recognize you. So we were going down the trail,
came around a little lake, looked over there and there's a guy laying up a side of a bunker just
watching us. Just at home, he doesn't recognize us as the enemy. He didn't know. So if you were kind
laying the mix it up, that was the place to be. We've got about five minutes left.
22 November 1969 serving in Tainan Province. Talk about the action that led to you're being
awarded the Silver Star. Once again, we was out with that Honakilla team and in this time we got
a captain from the S2 out with, we received information that the boundary between the first
care division and the 25th infantry division will be in utilized as a transportation communications
alley for the NVA. And this was established because neither unit could shoot to within 200 meters
of this boundary line without getting permission from the other. So if the enemy sits out there one night
and watches, he knows that you're shooting up the here from that direction, up the here from that
direction but you're not shooting here. So he just safely walks down the trail. So we took that
crew out there to ambush this thing and we did it. We killed two people and attempted an
extraction by the battalion commander with his aircraft and that went nowhere except with 13 bullet
holes in it. And then we must run and forth for the next four hours and we've got three other
aircraft shot up. I don't know how many people wound it. Sure story was they could not extract us
and we lost one KIE and that and two people wound it and wound up with only three or four people
and being extracted eventually one of those outside the box deals we talked about about a captain
from the 25th Infantry Division. He had an armored outfit and he had told me early in the day
when he inserted us while only resupply running to our location. If I got in trouble calling my
dear and he responded. He got us out of there. So I have a strong affection for that man today.
I hope that you did. I want to read the citation where you were awarded the Silver Star.
It says 22 November 1969 while serving in the Tainin Province Republic of Vietnam went
a force led by First Sergeant Bailey left their position. They encountered intense automatic
weapons fire. First Sergeant Bailey repeatedly exposed himself to the hostile fire to pull
the wounded to safety. His galleon action is in keeping with the highest traditions of the
military service and reflects great credit upon himself as unit and the United States Army.
The Silver Star obviously it's an award that you own proudly. Yes that would be true.
I don't need any more. Right. I wanted your awards and accommodations for many among them
from 62 to 65 Army Commodation Medal. May of 67 awarded Army Commodation Medal with
the Baller device March of 1967 your first Purple Heart June of 67 Army Commodation Medal
First Oakleaf Cluster July of 67 bronze star medal April of 70 Silver Star.
November 69 second Purple Heart April 70 Army Air Medal June of 1970 bronze star medal
First Oakleaf Cluster in January of 1973 upon your retirement the Army Commodation Medal
and that was just a few. And in a matter of fact we have a photograph right there of
some of your your metal box you can see the Purple Heart and to the right a bit the Silver Star.
And there's the certificate the Silver Star.
Certificate. Very proud as well you should be. We're out of time. We're so much more to tell but
we're out of time but thank you for your service and thank you for being here. Thank you for having me.
All right thank you. Jeffrey Bailey retired from the Army 31 January 1973 the same year that he
started Bailey trucking which he and his family still operate today. He and Orrah have been married
some 53 years and have four children and five grandchildren. We salute Jeffrey Bailey for his two
decades of brave military service. I'm Tom Turbivill join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.